README.md, before:

docker-compose
==============

docker-compose file to setup an instance of **lava-server** and/or **lava-dispatcher**
from scratch. In this setup, every service will be running in a separate container.

Usage
=====

Requirements
------------

In order to use this docker-compose file, you need:

* docker.io
* docker-compose

You can install the dependencies using:

    apt install docker.io docker-compose

Installing
----------

You just need to fetch the sources:

    git clone https://git.lavasoftware.org/lava/pkg/docker-compose
    cd docker-compose

Using it
--------

In order to start the containers, run:

    docker-compose build
    docker-compose up

docker-compose will spawn a container for each services:

* PostgreSQL
* apache2
* gunicorn (aka lava-server-gunicorn)
* lava-master
* lava-logs
* lava-publisher
* lava-dispatcher
* ser2net
* tftpd
* dispatcher-webserver
* ganesha-nfs

All the services will be connected to each other.

docker-compose will also create some volumes for:

* device dictionaries
* health-checks
* job outputs
* PostgreSQL data
* dispatcher httpd
* dispatcher tftpd

Backup/restore of the database
------------------------------

## Backup
Create the sql backup file:

    docker exec --user postgres docker-compose_db_1 bash -c \
                "pg_dump --username=lavaserver lavaserver > /tmp/lavaserver.sql"

Then retrieve it on host:

    docker cp docker-compose_db_1:/tmp/lavaserver.sql .

## Restore
In order to restore an instance from a backup, first delete the db container
and its associated volume:

    docker-compose stop
    docker container rm docker-compose_db_1; docker volume rm lava-server-pgdata

Then place the .sql (or .sql.gz) file in initdb.d/ folder:

    docker-compose -f docker-compose.yaml -f docker-compose-restore-backup.yaml up -d

The file docker-compose-restore-backup.yaml mounts an extra volume in postgres
container, in /docker-entrypoint-initdb.d
References:
- [postgres docker documentation](https://registry.hub.docker.com/_/postgres/)
- [postgres docker entrypoint script](https://github.com/docker-library/postgres/blob/master/docker-entrypoint.sh)


Standalone dispatcher container
-------------------------------

## Configuration (simple, for QEMU purposes)

All configuration is stored in `.env` file. Some of the steps are required
whilst others are optional.

* Change DC_LAVA_MASTER_HOSTNAME and DC_LAVA_LOGS_HOSTNAME to <server_name>
  which points to the running LAVA master instance.
* (optional) set DC_LAVA_MASTER_ENCRYPT to `--encrypt` if the master instance
  is using encryption for master-slave communication.
* (optional) [Create certificates](https://validation.linaro.org/static/docs/v2/pipeline-server.html#create-certificates) on the slave.
  `sudo /usr/share/lava-dispatcher/create_certificate.py foo_slave_1`
  This can be done in three ways:
  * by running "docker exec -it docker-compose_lava-dispatcher_1 bash"
  (for this to work you'd need to build and run the containers first - see
  below).
  * by using published container images:
  `docker run -v $PWD:/tmp/certs --rm lavasoftware/lava-dispatcher /usr/share/lava-common/create_certificate.py --directory  /tmp/certs foo_slave_1`
  * alternatively you can create the certificates on system which has LAVA
    packages already installed.
* (optional) Copy public certificate from master and the private slave
  certificate created in previous step to directory `dispatcher/certs/` of this
  project. Currently the key names should be the default ones (master.key and
  slave.key_secret).
* Execute `make lava-dispatcher`; at this point multiple containers should be
  up and running and the worker should connect to the LAVA server instance of
  your choosing.
* Add a new device and set its' device template (alternatively you can update
  existing device to use this new worker)
  Example QEMU device template:
  ```
  {% extends 'qemu.jinja2' %}
  {% set mac_addr = 'DF:AD:BE:EF:33:02' %}
  {% set memory = 1024 %}
  ```
  You can do this via [XMLRPC](https://validation.linaro.org/api/help/#scheduler.devices.set_dictionary), [lavacli](https://docs.lavasoftware.org/lavacli/) or [REST API](https://staging.validation.linaro.org/api/v0.2/devices/staging-qemu01/dictionary/) (if using version 2020.01 and higher).
* (optional) If the lab where this container runs is behind a proxy or you
  require any specific worker environment settings, you will need to update the
  proxy settings by setting the [worker environment](https://docs.lavasoftware.org/lava/proxy.html#using-the-http-proxy)
  You can do this via this [XMLRPC API call](https://validation.linaro.org/api/help/#scheduler.workers.set_env).
  In case the worker sits behind a proxy, you will also need to set
  `SOCKS_PROXY=--socks-proxy <address>:port` in the `.env` configuration file
  Furthermore, you will need to add a proxy settings to the `.env` file for
  docker resource downloads (http_proxy, ftp_proxy and https_proxy environment
  variable).

`Note: If the master instance is behind a firewall, you will need to create a
port forwarding so that ports 5555 and 5556 are open to the public.`


## Configuration (advanced, for physical DUT purposes)

If you're setting up a standalone dispatcher container, make sure you go
through the above configuration first, it is mandatory for this step.
In order to run test jobs on physical devices we will need a couple of
additional setup steps:

* PDU control:
  * The dispatcher docker container will already download pdu scripts from
    [lava-lab repo](https://git.linaro.org/lava/lava-lab.git/) which you can use
    in device configuration but if you use custom PDU scripts you need to
    provide them and copy them into `dispatcher/power-control` directory; they
    will be copied into `/root/power-control` path in the container.
  * If you need SSH keys for PDU control, copy the private key to the
    `dispatcher/ssh` directory and the public key on to the PDU
  * SSH config - if there's a need for a specific SSH configuration (like
    tunnel passthrough, proxy, strict host checking, kexalgorithm etc), create
    the config file with relevant settings and copy it into `dispatcher/ssh`
    dir; it will be copied to `/root/.ssh` directory on the dispatcher
    container.
* ser2net config - update `ser2net/ser2net.config` with the corresponding
  serial port and device settings
* Update/add [device dictionary](https://docs.lavasoftware.org/lava/glossary.html#term-device-dictionary) with power commands and connection command
* Add dispatcher_ip setting to the [dispatcher configuration](https://validation.linaro.org/api/help/#scheduler.workers.set_config). Alternatively you can use
[REST API](https://lava_server/api/v0.2/workers/docker_dispatcher_hostname/config/) if you are using version 2020.01 or higher:
  * `dispatcher_ip: <docker host ip address>`
* Disable/stop rpcbind service on host machine if it's running - docker service
  nfs will need port 111 available on the host.


## Running

In order to start the containers, run:

    docker-compose build lava-dispatcher
    docker-compose up lava-dispatcher

or, alternatively:

    make lava-dispatcher

Commit message:

README, Makefile: Add "docker-compose pull" command.
Required since switching to "*:latest" docker images (instead of explicitly
versioned images used before). If such a ":latest" image is already present
locally, docker-compose won't try to update it from DockerHub - unless
explicitly told to do so with "docker-compose pull".

Fixes: #12

Signed-off-by: Paul Sokolovsky <paul.sokolovsky@linaro.org>

README.md, after:

docker-compose
==============

docker-compose file to setup an instance of **lava-server** and/or **lava-dispatcher**
from scratch. In this setup, every service will be running in a separate container.

Usage
=====

Requirements
------------

In order to use this docker-compose file, you need:

* docker.io
* docker-compose

You can install the dependencies using:

    apt install docker.io docker-compose

Installing
----------

You just need to fetch the sources:

    git clone https://git.lavasoftware.org/lava/pkg/docker-compose
    cd docker-compose

Using it
--------

In order to start the containers, run:

    docker-compose pull
    docker-compose build
    docker-compose up

docker-compose will spawn a container for each services:

* PostgreSQL
* apache2
* gunicorn (aka lava-server-gunicorn)
* lava-master
* lava-logs
* lava-publisher
* lava-dispatcher
* ser2net
* tftpd
* dispatcher-webserver
* ganesha-nfs

All the services will be connected to each other.

docker-compose will also create some volumes for:

* device dictionaries
* health-checks
* job outputs
* PostgreSQL data
* dispatcher httpd
* dispatcher tftpd

Updating to new LAVA version
----------------------------

Newer LAVA versions are pulished regularly as docker images. To update to
the latest images (in the project directory):

    git pull
    docker-compose pull

Backup/restore of the database
------------------------------

## Backup
Create the sql backup file:

    docker exec --user postgres docker-compose_db_1 bash -c \
                "pg_dump --username=lavaserver lavaserver > /tmp/lavaserver.sql"

Then retrieve it on host:

    docker cp docker-compose_db_1:/tmp/lavaserver.sql .

## Restore
In order to restore an instance from a backup, first delete the db container
and its associated volume:

    docker-compose stop
    docker container rm docker-compose_db_1; docker volume rm lava-server-pgdata

Then place the .sql (or .sql.gz) file in initdb.d/ folder:

    docker-compose -f docker-compose.yaml -f docker-compose-restore-backup.yaml up -d

The file docker-compose-restore-backup.yaml mounts an extra volume in postgres
container, in /docker-entrypoint-initdb.d
References:
- [postgres docker documentation](https://registry.hub.docker.com/_/postgres/)
- [postgres docker entrypoint script](https://github.com/docker-library/postgres/blob/master/docker-entrypoint.sh)


Standalone dispatcher container
-------------------------------

## Configuration (simple, for QEMU purposes)

All configuration is stored in `.env` file. Some of the steps are required
whilst others are optional.

* Change DC_LAVA_MASTER_HOSTNAME and DC_LAVA_LOGS_HOSTNAME to <server_name>
  which points to the running LAVA master instance.
* (optional) set DC_LAVA_MASTER_ENCRYPT to `--encrypt` if the master instance
  is using encryption for master-slave communication.
* (optional) [Create certificates](https://validation.linaro.org/static/docs/v2/pipeline-server.html#create-certificates) on the slave.
  `sudo /usr/share/lava-dispatcher/create_certificate.py foo_slave_1`
  This can be done in three ways:
  * by running "docker exec -it docker-compose_lava-dispatcher_1 bash"
  (for this to work you'd need to build and run the containers first - see
  below).
  * by using published container images:
  `docker run -v $PWD:/tmp/certs --rm lavasoftware/lava-dispatcher /usr/share/lava-common/create_certificate.py --directory  /tmp/certs foo_slave_1`
  * alternatively you can create the certificates on system which has LAVA
    packages already installed.
* (optional) Copy public certificate from master and the private slave
  certificate created in previous step to directory `dispatcher/certs/` of this
  project. Currently the key names should be the default ones (master.key and
  slave.key_secret).
* Execute `make lava-dispatcher`; at this point multiple containers should be
  up and running and the worker should connect to the LAVA server instance of
  your choosing.
* Add a new device and set its' device template (alternatively you can update
  existing device to use this new worker)
  Example QEMU device template:
  ```
  {% extends 'qemu.jinja2' %}
  {% set mac_addr = 'DF:AD:BE:EF:33:02' %}
  {% set memory = 1024 %}
  ```
  You can do this via [XMLRPC](https://validation.linaro.org/api/help/#scheduler.devices.set_dictionary), [lavacli](https://docs.lavasoftware.org/lavacli/) or [REST API](https://staging.validation.linaro.org/api/v0.2/devices/staging-qemu01/dictionary/) (if using version 2020.01 and higher).
* (optional) If the lab where this container runs is behind a proxy or you
  require any specific worker environment settings, you will need to update the
  proxy settings by setting the [worker environment](https://docs.lavasoftware.org/lava/proxy.html#using-the-http-proxy)
  You can do this via this [XMLRPC API call](https://validation.linaro.org/api/help/#scheduler.workers.set_env).
  In case the worker sits behind a proxy, you will also need to set
  `SOCKS_PROXY=--socks-proxy <address>:port` in the `.env` configuration file
  Furthermore, you will need to add a proxy settings to the `.env` file for
  docker resource downloads (http_proxy, ftp_proxy and https_proxy environment
  variable).

`Note: If the master instance is behind a firewall, you will need to create a
port forwarding so that ports 5555 and 5556 are open to the public.`


## Configuration (advanced, for physical DUT purposes)

If you're setting up a standalone dispatcher container, make sure you go
through the above configuration first, it is mandatory for this step.
In order to run test jobs on physical devices we will need a couple of
additional setup steps:

* PDU control:
  * The dispatcher docker container will already download pdu scripts from
    [lava-lab repo](https://git.linaro.org/lava/lava-lab.git/) which you can use
    in device configuration but if you use custom PDU scripts you need to
    provide them and copy them into `dispatcher/power-control` directory; they
    will be copied into `/root/power-control` path in the container.
  * If you need SSH keys for PDU control, copy the private key to the
    `dispatcher/ssh` directory and the public key on to the PDU
  * SSH config - if there's a need for a specific SSH configuration (like
    tunnel passthrough, proxy, strict host checking, kexalgorithm etc), create
    the config file with relevant settings and copy it into `dispatcher/ssh`
    dir; it will be copied to `/root/.ssh` directory on the dispatcher
    container.
* ser2net config - update `ser2net/ser2net.config` with the corresponding
  serial port and device settings
* Update/add [device dictionary](https://docs.lavasoftware.org/lava/glossary.html#term-device-dictionary) with power commands and connection command
* Add dispatcher_ip setting to the [dispatcher configuration](https://validation.linaro.org/api/help/#scheduler.workers.set_config). Alternatively you can use
[REST API](https://lava_server/api/v0.2/workers/docker_dispatcher_hostname/config/) if you are using version 2020.01 or higher:
  * `dispatcher_ip: <docker host ip address>`
* Disable/stop rpcbind service on host machine if it's running - docker service
  nfs will need port 111 available on the host.


## Running

In order to start the containers, run:

    docker-compose build lava-dispatcher
    docker-compose up lava-dispatcher

or, alternatively:

    make lava-dispatcher
